# Exercises for 4/9-2017

Author: Michael Kirkedal Thomsen <kirkedal@acm.org>

These exercises are intended to give your a first quick feeling of C and prepare you for what comes in A0. Use the exercise classes to get help. This is not part of the assignment.

For the following:

* compile your program using a make file
  * remember to include all warnings flags
  * your solution must not produce any warnings
* I will use "print" as a term for writing to stdout

## Printing in C
Write a C program `mynameis` that prints your name.

## Input arguments in C
Write a C program `repeatme`  that given a `string` as argument, prints the string twice on separate lines.

If the program gets a number of arguments that is different from 1 it should print "`Wrong number of arguments`".

## Input argument validation
Write a C program that `noAs` that given a `string` as argument, does either of the following. 

  * If the first character of the string is an the `char` `A` it prints "`No beginning A's are allowed`",
  * otherwise it prints the given string.

Reminder: Consider how `string`s are formatted in C. 

Note: reuse your argument validation from before. You can just as well learn it from the beginning. _Always sanitise your input._


## File printing
Write a C program `fileecho` that given a filename (formatted as a `string`) opens the file in read-only mode, reads its content and prints this.

## File check
Write a C program `fileexist` that given a filename (formatted as a `string`) checks if it can read the file and prints a reasonable status message.

## File content validation
Write a C program `noAshere` that given a filename (formatted as a `string`) opens the file in read-only mode, reads its content and checks if it contains any character `A`. If it contains an `A` print "`No A's are allowed`" otherwise print "`Ok`".



## Simple Caesar Cipher (bonus)
Write a C program `caesar` that is given a `string` as argument (we will treat this as a plain text) prints the string where all characters are replaced with the character with one higher `char` value.

The standard Caesar cipher (also called shift cipher), used for communicating secret messages in ancient times, shifts all letters _n_ places in the alphabet, where _n_ then is the secret key. For simplicity we have here fixed _n_ to 1 and do not use consider the alphabet a finite field.

If you are interested, you can read more at [https://learncryptography.com/classical-encryption/caesar-cipher](https://learncryptography.com/classical-encryption/caesar-cipher)

### Extras
You are welcome to extend this with

  * an extra argument that is read to an integer, such you can implement the full Caesar cipher,
  * a flag (e.g. argument "-enc" and "-dec"), such that you program can perform encryption and decryption,
  * reading plain text from a filename and writing it to a different filename,
  * ensure that you only use the letters of the ASCII table; ensure that the case of each letter is preserved.
