# Exercises for 10/9-2017

Author: Michael Kirkedal Thomsen <kirkedal@acm.org>

These exercises are intended to give the first experience
with using GDB. We will also look a bit more at pointer
arithmetic.

For all of the below, you should use `make` to build your programs. To
parametrize `make` to build with all the necessary compiler flags, start by
writing down a `Makefile` containing the following:

```
CC=gcc
CFLAGS=-std=c11 -Wall -Werror -Wextra -pedantic -g
```

Now, to compile the programs below, just `make` them. For example:

```
$ make unary
```

It is very important to include the `-g` flag as this enables debugging.

## Play with GDB
Take some of the programs from last weeks exercises or perhaps even the assignment and play around with GDB. Recreate a bug that you had in your program and try finding it with GDB.
Test most of the commands on the [GDB QUICK REFERENCE sheet](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/refcard.pdf.gz).

## Debug some programs
Attached there is a list of programs containing some different bugs. Some of them very obvious. Use GDB to identify and profile the bugs. Record your approach in a GDB script.

We recommend to investigate in the following order:

* `hello.c`
* `table.c`
* `capitalize.c`
* `array.c`

## `./arg_address`
Write a C program that given any number of arguments, prints the addresses of the all arguments and exits with
`EXIT_SUCCESS`.

## `./ohce`
Write a C program that given one argument, uses pointer arithmetic to print an argument in reverse order and exits with `EXIT_SUCCESS`.
All other cases should exit with `EXIT_FAILURE`.
