# Exercises for Wednesday 4th of October 2017

## Get the new simulator

Check out the newest versions of the assembler and simulator
from https://github.com/kirkedal/compSys-e2017-sim and build it.

## Run it and don't panic

The simulator has been extended with a load of new options, which
will be documented soon. Try running the simulator on one of your
programs you know well (from A2) but add the option "-m".

We've added a very flexible performance model to the simulator, capable
of simulating the behavior of programs on many different microarchitectures.
You can enable it by the option "-m"

The performance model includes 2 levels of caching: separate instruction-
and data-caches and a shared level 2 cache. It also includes a variety
of branch predictors and a return predictor.

After running your program the simulator will show statistics about primary
and secondary cache usage as well as branch and return predictors.

Don't panic.

Run the simulator without any arguments. It will print a long list
of command line options. Look at them and Don't panic. We'll use just
a few, which are detailed in the following exercises.

## Investigate how caching works

In the examples directory you'll find two programs which we'll use in the following:
"heapsort.x64" and "matrixmult-big.x64". Assemble both programs with the assembler.

The caches are by default 16KB for the primary caches and 256KB for the secondary.
Your task is to determine the effect of different primary data caches. To do this,
you must vary the parameter called "-dc:idxsz=num".. it is by default 7 which corresponds
to 16KB. 8 means 32KB, 6 means 8KB and so forth. Now run both heapsort and the matrix
multiply program with primary data cache sizes of 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64KB. for each run,
Note the hitrate for the DCache and plot the hitrates for the two programs into a
diagram.

## Investigate the effect on running time

What's a good size for the data cache? It would be tempting to just say: the biggest,
but there is no such thing as a free lunch. We'll assume that a primary cache of 4KB
can be accessed in 2 cycles, that 8 and 16KB caches require 3 cycles while 32 and 64
KB requires 4 cycles.

The default pipeline configuration for the simulator corresponds to the "realistic"
pipeline presented at the lecture today. This has a cache access latency of 3 cycles.

Now redo the experiment from the previous exercise, but this time also set the cache
access latency using the parameter "-clat=2", "-clat=3" and "-clat=4" for the corresponding
primary data cache sizes. Collect the number of cycles used for both programs.

Which data cache size would you recommend, based on only the matrix multiply and heapsort
programs?

