---
title: 'Introduction to Operating Systems and Concurrent Programming'
author: 'Troels Henriksen'
date: 23rd of October, 2017'
patat:
  theme:
    codeBlock: []
    header: [bold]
    emph: [bold]
---

# Hello, World!

## Who Am I and What's Going On?

  * Troels Henriksen (athas@sigkill.dk); postdoc at DIKU.

  * Office at 01-0-017 at HCØ - come by if you have any questions.

  * I will be giving lectures from today and until the 27th of November.

  * I will write the A4 and A5 assignments.

# Why Study Operating Systems?

## Why Study Operating Systems?

### Short answer

They are where the magic happens.

. . .

### Longer answer

  * *For Inspiration*: One of the most potent *engineering abstractions* in computing.
    * Each program thinks it has an entire machine to itself.
    * Controlled communication between programs.
    * Abstracts over hardware differences.
  * *Practical Skills*: You can rarely avoid going through an OS.
    * Performance characteristics of the abstraction.
    * What is fundamentally possible?

## Unix

  * Unix is an operating system developed in the 1970s by Ken Thompson
    and Dennis Ritchie.

  * Most modern operating systems heavily influenced by Unix (even
    Windows).

  * Many operating systems are *direct descendants*: Linux, iOS,
    macOS, the *BSDs, etc.

### We will use Unix designs for all examples

Because Unix is *simple* and *representative* of modern operating
systems.

# Purpose of Operating Systems

## Abstraction

  * Shield the programmer from hardware details, e.g:

    * *File input/output:*  Unix provides the same
      interface to hard disks, SSDs, tapes, floppy disks, CD-ROMS,
      etc.

    * *User interaction:* Is the user sitting at the screen of the
      machine (if any), or connected over some network protocol?

    * Does the computer have one, ten, or a hundred CPUs?  Is "the
      computer" actually a thousand networked computers?

  * Let multiple programs run *concurrently*, each thinking it has the
    machine to itself.

## Robustness

  * A program should not be able to crash the entire machine.

  * Programs belonging to different *users* should not be able to spy
    on each other.

    * *User* does not necessarily mean *human*.  Code from random
      websites could be considered a different user than the one I
      usually use, for security purposes.

  * *Control*.  If a program misbehaves, I should be able to terminate
    it.

## Persistence

  * A program should be able to store data that can be accessed next
    time that program runs (or by other programs).

  * *File systems* abstract over hardware differences and provide
    security mechanisms.

## Parts of an Operating System

An operating system contains of two main parts:

 * *Kernel*: has *total hardware control*, and accesses the hardware directly.

 * *Userspace components*: Regular programs that *communicate* with
   the kernel via *system calls*, and manage things like login rules,
   GUIs, etc.

In this course we focus on the *kernel* part of the OS.  We will see
how to communicate with the kernel through system calls, and what
facilities it makes available.

# How and Why Operating Systems Work

## Exceptional Control Flow

The machine you have studied so far executes instructions in some
smooth sequence:

    movq %rbx, %r10
    mulq %rax, %r10
    addq %rcx, %r10
    mulq %r15, %r10
    ...

But events may happen that have to be addressed *immediately*:

    * Network packet arrives.
    * The user presses a key.
    * We want to wait for data from a slow disk.
    * ... or maybe some other program wants a chance to run!

These interrupt the instruction sequence with an *exception* or
*interrupt*.

## Handling Exceptions

Each type of exception is assigned an *exception number*, which
functions as index into an *exception table*:

| *Position* | *Value* |
| :-- | :--: |
| 0 | Address of code for exception 0 |
| 1 | Address of code for exception 1 |
| ... | ... |
| N | Address of code for exception N |

When an exception occurs, the program counter is set to the handler
for the corresponding exception.

The exception handler will store the state of the running computation
by pushing the registers to the stack.  When the handler is done, the
registers are restored and the original computation resumes.

## Four Kinds of Exceptions

  * *Interrupts:* Occur *asynchronously* as the result of external
    hardware events.  E.g: user clicked a button.

  * *Traps*: Intentionally triggered by programs.  E.g: system calls.

  * *Faults*: Potentially recoverable errors, such as page faults
    (accessing invalid memory), or executing an invalid instruction.

  * *Aborts*: Catastrophic errors, resulting in termination.  E.g:
    DRAM parity errors.


## Privileged and Non-Privileged Contexts

A context may be *privileged* or *non-privileged*.

  * A *privileged* ("kernel mode") context may:
     * Execute any instructions.
     * Write to any register.
     * Write to any part of memory.
     * Turn itself non-privileged.
  * A non-privileged ("user mode") context may:
     * Write to *some* registers; notably excluding those that affect
       privilege separation.
     * Use *some* instructions.
     * Access only memory that belongs to the context.
     * Violation triggers an exception.

The kernel runs privileged, and user programs are non-privileged.
Exception handlers are privileged.

## System Calls

 * A system call is done by an instruction that triggers a trap:
   `syscall n` asks for system call #`n`.

 * Used by non-privileged contexts to ask the kernel to carry out
   operations that require privileged access (e.g. file access).

 * Arguments to the system call passed in registers (or on the stack).

 * Conceptually a function call, but very different implementation.

# Processes and Multitasking

## Context Switching

What characterises the state of a computation?

  * Register contents

  * Program counter

  * Contents of memory

We can *context switch* by storing the former two on the stack, and
loading new register values from somewhere else (say, the stack of a
suspended computation).  Isolation of memory contents is via *virtual
memory*; the topic of text week.

## Multitasking

By *rapidly context switching* hundreds of times per second (triggered
by clock interrupt), we can run several computations *concurrently*.

| *Computation 1* | *Computation 2*   |
| :--             | :--               |
| movq %rbx, %r10 | ...               |
| mulq %rax, %r10 | ...               |
| addq %rcx, %r10 | ...               |
| ...             | addq %rcx, %r11   |
| ...             | mulq %r15, %r11   |
| ...             | movq mat2(%r11), %r13 |
| movq %rbx, %r11 | ...               |
| mulq %rax, %r11 | ...               |
| addq %rdx, %r11 | ...               |

## Processes

In Unix (and most other operating systems), the state of a computation
is encapsulated as a *process*.  The kernel maintains a *process
table*, which maps numeric *process IDs* (PIDs) to *process control
blocks* (PCBs):

### Typical PCB Contents

 * Register contents

 * Page table (for virtual memory)

 * File table

 * User ID

 * ...

## Process Isolation

Processes are in principle *isolated*.  What happens in process X does
not affect process Y.

### Process Communication

Processes ultimately operate in the same world - notably, file system
operations are visible between processes.

*Signals* can be used to send (very simple) asynchronous messages to
processes (topic of Wednesday and next Monday).

*Pipes* can be used for more elaborate communication, as we shall see.

## Processes and Programs

A "process" is not the same as a "program", although we often mix the
terms:

  * A *program* is code stored somewhere.  It is *passive*.

  * A process is a *running computation*.  It is *active*.

We can *launch a program* to turn it into a process that executes the
program code.

A program can be launched multiple times to produce multiple
independent processes.

## Process Management in Unix

 * We can ask for our PID with `getpid()`.

 * We can create clone ourselves process with `fork()`.

 * We can load new code with a file with `execve()` (and related).

 * We can wait for a child process with *waitpid()*.

## File Descriptors as Kernel Objects

Each process has a *file table* containing open file objects.

The kernel communicates file objects to userspace via *file
descriptors*, of C type `int`.  These act like indexes into the table.

*File descriptors are only meaningful in the process to which they
belong.*

The C type `FILE` is implemented in userspace as a *wrapper* around
file descriptors.

 * File descriptor to `FILE*`: `fdopen()`.
 * `FILE*` to file descriptor: `fileno()`.

`FILE` has a *much* easier-to-use interface than pure file
descriptors.

## Standard File Descriptors

By convention, three file descriptor numbers are used for common
purposes:

  * FD 0: standard input
  * FD 1: standard output
  * FD 2: standard error

The C library initialises the global `FILE*` objects `stdin`,
`stdout`, and `stderr` from these FDs.
